#Points of instruction for the ignorant as also, an expositition on the ten commandements, and the Lords Prayer, by questions and answeres. With an examination before our comming to the Lords table. And a short direction for spending of time well. By Robert Horne.#

##Horne, Robert, 1565-1640.##
Points of instruction for the ignorant as also, an expositition on the ten commandements, and the Lords Prayer, by questions and answeres. With an examination before our comming to the Lords table. And a short direction for spending of time well. By Robert Horne.
Horne, Robert, 1565-1640.

##General Summary##

**Links**

[TCP catalogue](http://www.ota.ox.ac.uk/tcp/)  • 
[HTML](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-HTML/free/A03/A03697.html)  • 
[EPUB](http://tei.it.ox.ac.uk/tcp/Texts-EPUB/free/A03/A03697.epub) • 
[Page images (Historical Texts)](https://data.historicaltexts.jisc.ac.uk/view?pubId=eebo-99856110e&pageId=eebo-99856110e-21632-1)

**Availability**

This keyboarded and encoded edition of the
	       work described above is co-owned by the institutions
	       providing financial support to the Early English Books
	       Online Text Creation Partnership. This Phase I text is
	       available for reuse, according to the terms of Creative
	       Commons 0 1.0 Universal. The text can be copied,
	       modified, distributed and performed, even for
	       commercial purposes, all without asking permission.

**Major revisions**

1. __2002-07__ __TCP__ *Assigned for keying and markup*
1. __2002-08__ __Apex CoVantage__ *Keyed and coded from ProQuest page images*
1. __2002-10__ __Chris Scherer__ *Sampled and proofread*
1. __2002-10__ __Chris Scherer__ *Text and markup reviewed and edited*
1. __2002-12__ __pfs__ *Batch review (QC) and XML conversion*

##Content Summary##

#####Front#####
POINTS Of INSTRVCTION for the Ignorant: As also, An Exposition on the ten Commandements, and the Lor
1. To the CHRISTIAN Reader, the sauing knowledge of that truth which is accordingTitus 1. 1 to godlinesse.

#####Body#####

1. POINTS of Instruction for the Ignorant.
WHat is true happinesse? To know God, andIoh. 17. 3. Ier. 9. 24. Luk. 15. 17. 1. Chr. 28. 9 Heb. 11.WHat is true happinesse? To know God, andIoh. 17. 3. Ier. 9. 24. Luk. 15. 17. 1. Chr. 28. 9 Heb. 11.Can you knowe God?Not so plainely andExod. 33. 20 7. Cor. 13. 12 fully here as we shall hereafter, bHow is that?By his workes without vs, andRom. 1. 20. & 1. 19. within vs: and by some description •…fHow doth the VVord describ•… him?Exo. 3. 14. Ioh. 4. 24. Exo. 34. 6 Psal. 90. 2. 1. Tim. 1. 17 Isa. So much for the knowledge of God; what say you of the knowledge of your selfe?It may bee consi•…red What were you by creation in Adam before the Fall?A reasonable creature, consistingMatth 10. 28 GeneWhat are you since by Adams fall?A •…nner, and by sinne subiect to alRom. 3. 9 10 Iob. 14 4 Rom. 6 2VVhat are your sinnes?A guiltines in Adams〈◊〉 offence:Rom. 5 12. 18. & 7 18 Ieremy 17 9 Gen. 6. 5 MaWhat doe you consider in man thus fallen?〈◊〉 reco•…ry to saluation, and duty for it.What say you of his recouery?It may be considered in the worker thereof, or the meane of •…ding it.What say you of the worker?The worker or substance of it is1• Iohn 〈◊〉 1, 2 〈◊〉 1. 14 〈◊〉 3. 16 PhilVVhat is the meane whereby Christ is apprehended?Faith; which is a speciall perswasionGalat. 2. 20 AWhen doth this faith begin to breed and take place in your heart?When, by Gods grace, I begin to be By what meanes is this wrought?It is begunne (〈◊〉) by theRom. 10. 14. 17 Acts 8. 28. 34. 35. 37. IohWhat is Prayer?A 〈◊◊〉 God, through Christ,Iohn 16. 23 Iames 1. 6 Philip. 4. 6 with faith, whereby I What is a Sacrament?A visible 〈◊〉 of the Gospell, fullyRom. 4. 11 Genesis 17. 11 1. Cor. 11. 25 assuThen there be two Sacraments?Yea.Which are they?Baptisme, and the Lords Supper.1. Cor. 10. 1, 〈◊〉. & 12, 13.What is Baptisme?A seale of our entrance into theTitus 3. 5 Matth. 28. 19 Ephes. 5. 26 name, that isWhat do you 〈◊〉 therein?〈◊◊◊◊◊〉, 〈◊〉 the 〈◊◊◊◊〉 thing 〈◊〉.VVhat is the outward 〈◊〉?The 〈◊〉 of water, or 〈◊〉Ioh. 1. 31. Eph. 5. 26 sprinkling, 〈◊◊〉 in 〈◊◊〉 of VVhat 〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 grace, or 〈◊〉 thing 〈◊〉?The 〈◊◊◊◊◊〉,Heb. 9. 14 1. 〈◊〉. 6 〈◊〉 Acts 2. 〈◊◊〉. 36. 25〈Somuch for Baptisme: what is the Lords Supper?A seale of 〈◊◊〉 & 〈◊〉1. Cor. 10. 16 & 11. 24. 26 Iohn VVhat do you consider therein?The outward things 〈◊〉 and taken, and spirituall graces sealed and appVVhat are the outward things?The bread and wine giuen andMatth. 26. 26. 27 taken.What are the inward graces?The bo•…〈◊◊〉 of CHRISTIoh•… 6. 50, 51 giuen vs by God, 〈◊◊〉•…th receiued So much for 〈◊〉•…couery to saluation, what is his 〈◊〉 forit?True 〈◊〉.Psal. 50. 23 & 116. 12. 13 Rom.Wh•…rein standeth that?In new obedience: which is, to carry in my heart 〈◊〉 con•…ant purpose not to 
    _ A Short Exposition of the tenne Commandements in Questions and Answeres.
IN speaking of the Lawe, what is to be considered?First, what the Lawe is: and secondly, what is dueWhat is the Lawe?The Co•…ant of work•…, throughoutIer. 31. 31. 33 Deut. 4. 2•… the Old and New Te•…mWhere is it written?Most pithily and very brie•…y in the ten Commande•…ents, & more largely in the rWhat are the tenne Commandements?The ten words of the Law, whichDeut. 4 13 God gaue in Horeb, and wrWhat do you consider in them?The occasion, and commandements themsel•…es.What was the occasion of euery Commandement?The corruption of m•…ns nature 〈◊〉Galat. 3. 19 n•… to thWhat doe you consider in the Commandements themselues?The commandements of duetiesExodus 34. 1 to GoWhat say you of the Commandements of the first Table?〈◊〉•…re in thin•… com•… to them all, or proper What be the things commune?That they (all) haue their reasons: •…nd that (therefore) the preface to So much for the things commune, what are they that be proper?They 〈◊〉 dueti•…s t•… God, such as we oWhat are they that we owe euery day?They pertaine to G•… person or wor•…ip▪What Commandement concerneth his person?The first, which i•…: Thou shakFirst Comma•…dement.
haue no What doe you consider in this precept?The occa•…, 〈◊〉 matter of the C•…ment.What was the occasion?Our idolatrous〈◊〉 lu•…ing 〈◊〉Exech. 1•…. 3. 45 f•…lse 〈◊〉.What doe you consider in the matter of the Commandement?The thing forbi•…n, and thing•… commanded.What is the thing forbidden?To honour•…d set vp false gods;Luke 12. 19 or to su•…er 〈◊〉 thing to witWhat doe you meane by false gods?All other god•… saue IIHOVA:Colos. 3. 5 Philip. 3. 19 and s•…, wh•…So much for that which is forbidden: what is commanded?Deut. 6. 5 Ios. 24. 15 Matth. 4. 10 Ma•… 12. Wherein consisteth this?In the knowledge of God, andIohn 17. 3 Psalm. 9. 10 1. Chron. 28. 9 2. Thes.What fruits •…e they?Faith in GOD▪ and the effecte•… thereof.What be the effects of faith?Luke 10. 27 Deu. 6. 5. Psal. 69. 9. Ioh. 14. 23. Esa. 8. 13. Luke 12. 4Wherein consistoth loue?Ioh. 4. 22. 23 Deut. 6. 16 Esa. 4. 5. 21, 22 Gen. 47. 31 Iob. 1. 21. In prayWherein consisteth feare?Psal. 16. 8. Gen. 5. 24 Heb. 12. 28 Malach. 1. 6 1. Sam. 15. 22. In reuerenWhat is the su•…me of all?Ier. 5. 7 Zeph. 1. 5 Amo, 5. 26. Whomsoeuer •…e loue or feare, reuere•…ce So much for the Commandement that respecteth Gods person: what are they which concerne his worship?TWhat Comm•…ndement concerneth the parts of his worship?The next, which is: Thou shaltSecond 〈◊〉.
makWhat doe you consider therin?The occasion and matter of the Commandement.What was the occasion?Our foolish desire to haue our fanciesDeut. 7. 25, 26 Psal. 106. 35, 36. &c. fWhat doe you consider in the matter?First, that which is forbidden▪ and secondly, that which is commWhat is that which is forbidden?To worshippe other persons or things with the true, God, or the trueWherein, and how do we worship the true God in a false manner?First, in base estéeming of him: and sHow doe wee basely esteeme of God?When wee imagine him to beeDeut. 4. 12 Esa. 40. 18 Habac. 2 18 IerHow further?When we dedicate dayes of holinesseH•…s. 2. 13 Exod. 32. 5 Deut. 12. 32 Matth. 15. 9 EsaSo much for base esteeming: what call you sorgery in Gods seruice?When wee make the likenesse of anySomuch for that which is forbidden; what is commanded here?To hold al religion and religious deuotioSomuch for the Commaundement concerning the parts of Gods worship: what is that that concerneth

theWhat do you obserue therein?The occasion and matter of the Commandement.VVhat was the occasion?The readinesse of our nature toPsal. 14. 1. & 36. 1. Pro. 1. 25 Iob. 21. 14, VVhat doe you obserue in the matter?The things forbidden and commanded.VVhat is the thing forbidden?The vnreuerent vsing of any of the parts of Gods name.VVherein do those consist?Rom. 2. 24 Ezech. 36. 22 1. Tim. 6. 1 Eccles. 5. 1. 5. 6. & 8. 2. Iude 20.How is Religion abused?Luke 23. 34 Acts 3. 17 Mat. 23. 14 1. Tim. 4. •…. •…. & 2. 3. 1. Mal. 3. •… 1VVherein standeth this abuse?Rom. 9. 5 Deut. 28. 58 Gen. 16. 5 1. Sam. 23. 21 2. Kings 7. 2 Deut. 29How doe wee slightly regard Gods titles?When wee sweare vainely, 〈◊〉,

or falsly by them: or when weSomuch for the abuse of Gods titles: how do we abuse holy things?When we abuse Gods word, or other hHow do we abuse his word?2. Pet. 3. 4 •…ay 22. 12, 13 M•…t. 4. 6. 〈◊〉. 20. 6. Mar. 14. 58. Act. 24. How do we abuse his other ordinances?Esa. 58. 2. & 29. 13. 1. Cor. 11. 21. 30 1. Cor. 5. 4 Prou. 1. So much for the abuse of religion: what is that of the creatures?Am. 6. 4, 5, 6 Psal. 45. 5. 6. & 92So much for that which is forbidden: what is here commanded?To vse holy things & Gods creaturesDeut.So much for the Commaundements of dueties euery day: what is that of dueti•…s one day in s•…uen?The What do you obserue therein?The occasion and the commandement it selfe.What was the occasion?Our apt•…es to fall from God, andExod. 32. 8 •…. 2. 17. Psa. 106. 13. Eph. 5. What doe you obserue in the Commandement it selfe?A double precept: the one of the M. Perkins in hisVVhat is that of the sixe dayes labour?That which commandeth vs to1. Cor. 7. 20 Gen. 2. 15. & 3. 19.But some hold that these words, sixe dayes thou shalt labour, are words of permission only, and no cVVhat doth this teach?That not to labour the sixe dayes, in some particular profitable calling doth Somuch for the precept of the sixe dayes labour: what is that of the Sabbaoth?That wee keepe the dayVVhat do you obserue therein?The thing forbidden, and that which is commanded.VVhat is forbidden?The contempt, or not vsing of theProu. 8. 33. 35 Eccles 8. 2. 3 Pro. 1. 20, 21, 2Of what sorts are they?Esa. 58. 13 Ier. 17. 24, 25. Luke 6. 35, 36 Isa. 1. 15. Psal. 37. 21.Publike What are the publike?Workes of holinesse and mercy.VVhat are the workes of holinesse?Eccles. 4. 17 Mal. 2. 7. Hos. 4. 6. Pro. 23. 23 Acts 20. 7 1. Cor.VVhat are they of mercy?To visit the sicke and in prison: & by generall collection, to prouide to miSo much for publike: what are the priuate meanes?The meditation of the creation,Psal. 92. 4, 5, 6, 7So much for that which is forbidden: what is commanded?Upon the Lords day from earlyPsalm. 92. 1. 2.Who are reproued here?They who make the Sabboth, not a holy but a playing day, or day of worldly labSo much for the duties of the first Table concerning holinesse: what say you of the second?It contaiIn what consisteth the first sort of duties?In righteousnesse.In what consisteth the second?In sobrietie.What say you of the first?It forbiddeth all acts and purpose of vnrighteousnesse, or the motions theWhere are acts and purpose of vnrighteousnesse forbidden?In the fiue next Commandements.What say you of them?That they pertaine to Superiors, or, others.Where are we taught our duties to Superiors?In the first of the fiue, which is:〈◊〉 Commandement.honoWhat doe you obserue therein?The occassion, and matter of the Commandement.What was the occasion?Our proud nature that cannot abidePsalme 12. 4. Luk 19. 14. 27. Ephesians 2 2.What say you of the matter?It may be considered in the particular duties, and persons.Vnder what word are the duties specified?Under the word honour: by which is meant all subiection of What is the subiection of the body?Gen 48. 12. 1. Kings 1. 23. & 2. 19 Obeisance or outward seruice▪Wherein standeth that?Col. 3. 20 21. Luk 2. 51. Gen. 22 6 7 9 Ephe 5. 24. 1. Tim 5 4. Gen 47 12. RutHow must we obey?•…ro. 13. 1 & 15. 5. 1 Pet. 3. 6. & 2, 18. Col 3. 22. Gē. 31. 5 6. 7. 38, 39. ExodVVherein standeth our thankfulnesse?Tit. 2. 10. Gen. 30. 29. 30 & 31. 38. 39. & 39. 3. Gen. 24. 12, Somuch for the subiection of the body; what is that of the minde?The inward estimation, loue, and reSomuch for the duties: what are the persons to whom wee owe these duties.All superiors comprehended Of what sort are these?They are publike, or priuate.VVhat are the publike?Such as are in the commonwealth,1. Pet. 2. 13, 14 Heb. 13. 17 1. The. 5. 12, 1VVhat are the priuate?Such as are in the family, as Parents,Eph. 6. 1. Colos. 3. 22 Eph. 6▪•…, 6, 7 So much for the precept belonging to Superiours: What Commandements belong to others?The foure next.How are they diuided?Into duties belonging to their persons, and into duties, in things that belong What are the duties belonging to their persons?Innocency in the next, and purity in the seuenth CommWhat are the words of the next Commandement?Thou shalt not kill.Sixt Commandement.VVhat doe you consider therein?The occasion, and matter thereof.VVhat was the occasion?Our fierce and murtherous nature.Ioh. 8. 44. Ezek 16. 3. Mat. 3. 7.VVhat say you of the matter?It forbiddeth to shedde blood, andGen. 9. 6. Pro. 24. 11. •…. Kings 18. How may blood be shed, or wrong done?Inwardly, or outwardly.Mat. 5. 22. Ep. 4. 26. Col. 3. 8. Pro. 2How inwardly?By rash anger, malice, enuie, hatred, desire of reuenge, vnmercifulnesse, and other cruHow outwardly?By our words, or deeds.How by our words?By mocks, taunts, reproches; byLeuit. 19. 14. Ier. 20. 8. 10. Gen. 21. 9. Pro. 12. How by our deeds?Mat. 5. 30. Leuit. 24. 19. 20. Deut. 5. 17. Leuit. 24. 17. 1. Sam. 31. 4. 2. Sam. 1So much for that which is forbidden: what is commanded?Iam. 3 13. Eph. 4. 32. Col. 3. 〈◊〉. Iob. 29. So much for innocencie: what say you of purity?The next precept commandeth it, which forbiddeth AdulWhat are the words?Thou shalt not commit Adultery.Seuenth Commandement. What do you obserue in them?What was the occasion?Our vnchaste & adulterous nature.Esa. 57. 3. Psa. 51. 4. 5. Esa. 1. 4 Hos. 2. What say you of this further opening of the Commandement?Under the name of Adultery, we are forbiddeWhat vncleannes is here forbidden?All vncleannes inward & outward.What call you inward vncleannesse?The Adultery of the heart in filthyMat. 5. 28. Iam. 1. 14, 15. IerWhat is outward vncleanenesse?It is in word, or deede.What is that in word?Uncleane talke and readings toEph. 4. 29. & 5, 3. the corrupting of our selues,VVhat is that indeede?It is in the adulteries themselues, or prouocations thereunto.VVhat say you of the adulteries themselues?They are of married persons, orHeb. 13. 4. Leu. 19. 29. DVVhat is adultery in Mariage?An vncleanesse against it in their entrance, or afterward.How may they be said to bee vncleane in their entrance?Leuit. 20. 11. 12 Eze. 22. 10. 11. Leuit. 18.How afterward?When they 〈◊〉 with •…rang •…lesh, or abuse their own mari•…ge.So much for the adulteries themselues: what say you of the prouocations thereunto?They belong to theVVhat are they that belong to the bodie?Deut. 22. 12. Esa. 3. 18. 19. &c. & 4. 4. Zep. 1. 8. Pro. 7.VVhat are they which bee in the body it selfe?Al wanton lookings, whisperings,Pro. 6. 13. 2. Pe. 2. So much for that which is forbidden: what is commanded as the sum of all?To keepe our owne bodies anSo much for the duties that concerne o•…r Neighbours person: what are they that are in things belongWhere are we charged with the preseruation of their goods?In the next Eight Commandement,Eight CommaWhat doe you obserue therein?The occasion of the Commandement, and the matter.What was the occasion?Esa. 5. 8. Ier. 22 14. 15. Col. 3. 5 Mic. 2. 2. Act 20 33.Our conetous and 〈◊〉What doe you consider in the matter of the Commandement?The things forbidden and commanded.What is the thing forbidden?Theft, which is a violent and open, or secret and craftie taking away, oOf what sorts is it?Inward, and outward.What is the inward Theft?The theft of the heart, or that couetousnesse2. Pet. 2. 14. Ios. 7. 21. 1. What is the outward?It is the abuse of our own, or vniust pursuite of our Neighbours goods.How may a man be said to abuse his owne?By lauish spending, or couetous holding in.How by lauish spending?1. Tim. 5. 3. Luk 15. 13. & 14, 29, 30, Pro. 21, 17, & 23, 13, & 6, 1, 2, & 1How by couetous holding in?When by a miserable mind, he robs〈◊〉. 4 8. & 6. 1, 2. & 2, 26. himselfe oSo much for the abuse of our own goods: how doe we vniustly pursue anothers?Craftily, or without colHow craftily?1. Thes 4. 6 〈◊〉. 5. 4 Exo. 22. 21 22 Deut. 10. 18 &c. & 24. 14. Pr. 22. 22. Am. 5. 11.How without colour of Law?1. 〈◊◊〉 16. Pr. 1. 11, 12. 13, 14 Leuit. 19. 11. 〈◊〉. har. ▪. 3. 4. Leuit.So much for that which is forbidden! what is commanded?Heb. 13. 5. 1. Tim. 16. 6. Phil. 4. 11. Pr. 2So much for the preseruation of our neighbours goods: where are we charged with the care of his goodVVhat doe you obserue therein?The occasion of the Commandement, and matter thereof.VVhat was the occasion?Our 〈◊〉 and lying nature.Ps. 62 9. Esa. 57 4. Rom. 3. 4, 13.VVhat doe you obserue in the matter of the Commandement?first, what is forbidden, and secondly,

whaVVhat is forbidden?Esa. 5. 20. Phil. 4. 8. Mat. 1. 19.Under the name of false witnes, which is an vnHow many waies may such false witnesse be borne?Inwardly, and outwardly.How inwardly?Mat. 71. Rom. 14. 4. Acts 28. 4 1. Sam. 1. 14. Mat. 9. 3. 1. Sā. 18. 9. 15, 29, •…amesHow outwardly?Without speech, saying nothing: or, by speaking.How without speach?When we beare false witnesse inPs. 22. 7. Matt. 27. 39. lob. 16. 9. 1. King. 19. How by speaking?When wee giue forth, or receiue in some vncharitable report.VVhen beare we false witnesse in giuing forth a report?First, when we speake truly, and

yet not eytHow many waies may we speake that which is false of our Neighbour?In a lye, or vntruth.Col. 3. 9. ApVVhat call you a lye?Whatsoeuer a man speaketh against his mind, or knowledge. And1. Sam. 15. 20. PsVVhat call you an vntruth?When a man rashly vttereth an vntrue speach thinking he speakethPro. 19. 2How many waies may we speak that which is false of our selues?Either when we boast our seluesRom. 1.So much for false witnesse in giuing forth: what is it by receiuing in?It is such as concerneth our VVhat say you of those who receiue a false report against their neighbour?That as they, who make it,How may wee receiue a false report concerning our selues?Act. 12. 22. 23. &c. & ▪. 2, 3. Pr. 31. 31.So much for the thing forbidden: what is commanded?To haue a charitable opinion of1. Cor. 4. 5. 〈◊〉.So much for the Commandements that concerne all acts and purpose of vnright cousnesse: where are we What do you obserue therein?The occasion, and matter.VVhat was the occasion?Gen. 6. 5. & 8. 21. Mat. 12. 34. & 15, 19. Iob. 14. 4.The frailtie or ill disVVhat doe you obserue in the Commandement it selfe?The things forbidden & cōmanded.VVhat is forbidden?The least and shortest thought orRom. 7. 7. Iam. 1. 14. 〈◊〉. 4 14. desire of the Of what sorts are these?They are either originall corruption, as it were the firebrand it selfe, or So much for that which is forbidden; what is commanded?Being contented with our portion,1. Tim. 6. 8So much for the Commandements of duties to our neighbour in righteoufnesse:

what say you of SobrietSo much for the Law: what is due to those that breake it?Punishments, more or lesse in thisGal. 3. 1What call you Hell?That euerlasting fire, or treasuryMar. 9. 45. 46. of secret fire, prepared and keWhere is the place of hell?God hath not reuealed. And, let vs, that haue the hope of ye Saints, rathWherein consist the torments of this place of hell?Generally, in these two punishments, of losse andWhat call you the punishment of losse?An euerlasting separation from God and Christ, which is a plagVVhy call you this separation from God, so great a plague and torment?If the absence of the Sunne caSomuch for the punishment of losse: what is that of sense?That when euery member of the body, and 〈◊What is this called in Scripture?It hath many names giuen to it, toMarke 9. 44, 47 Mat. 22. 13 & 25.What do you gather of this?If a man would not, to gaine the world, lye on a 〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 wood for a veHow doth the Scripture further, and for more terrour speake of this place, and the torments of hell?What gather you of this?That as it would bee a grieuous thing to a man to liue a banished mans life Shew this (yet) a little further.If Lots righteous soule was vered2. Pet. 2. 7. 8. so much, with theNow where hel (thus described) is due to the breakers of the law, what do you gather?That, without rAnd must Idolaters go to hol without repentance, what (then) must Idolaters do to be saued?They mustWhat must customary and raging swearers do?They that take vp for a 〈◊〉, the 〈◊〉 of the Holy One,〈◊〉 How, further, doe you perswade this dutie?Whatsoeuer is more then yea, yea, or nay, nay, to wit, by VVhat must rebels to gouernment doe?If they be children, they must notGen. 9. 24, 25 Deut. 21. 18, 1What must Murtherers doe?〈◊〉 of 〈◊〉 anger: 〈◊〉 out all1. Sam. 25. 32, 33. Iob. 39. 37, 38. Eph. 4. 3What must Adulterers doe?〈◊〉 the 〈◊〉 out of the 〈◊〉 of their mind, and be chaste within:Iob. 31. 1. What must theeues doe?Remember that flying booke spoken of in Zechary, a Booke of bitterZechar. 5. 3How do you perswade this duty?They that do not so, or doe otherwaies,Habac. 2. 9. couet an euil coueWhat must lyars doe?Not only abhorre to lye in 〈◊〉 orPsal. 15. 2. Ioh. 8. 44. earnest; but, speake tBut lying is become their trade?But they that vse the trade, shal not be 〈◊〉 in it. For, they are ofBut what say you of merry lying?There is no 〈◊〉 found in Gods Tabernacle. And, if wee must answereMaWhat say you of the officious, which some call the good and necessary lie?Necessitie can no more priWhat do you conclude of al together?That, to do the good, and hate the euil,Amo. 5. 14, 15, is the wBut who is sufficient for these things? And who (then) can be saued?Indeed, it is not in man, nor inWhat do you gather of this?That by the often sight of our selues in the Law, we must be wained from To what end (then) serueth the Law?To be the glasse wherein to view our estate in euery CommandementThen, it is necessarie that wee doe our best to keep the Law, though wee cannot be iustified by it?Y
    _ The like short exposition of the Lords Prayer, in Questions and Answeres.
WHat is Prayer?A religious calling vponPsalme 50. 15. •…remie 33. 3. the name of GOD by Petition, orWhat parts hath Prayer?Two, as Petition, and giuing of1. Tim. 2. 1. 1. Thes. 5. 17. 18 〈1 line〉 ThanWhat call you petition?A faithfull calling vpon the name ofPsa. 25. 1. & 4. 1 Pro. 30. 8. 〈◊〉. 24 27What do you gather of this?That God (only) is to be prayed vnto,Psa 65. 2. & 44, 20. 21, Ier. 31. 18So much for petition: what call you giuing of thanks?A 〈◊〉 returne of all our receitsLuke. 10. 21. 1What difference doe you put betweene prayer and praise?Prayer 〈◊〉 what we want, andLuke 17. 13. 15 1What doe you obserue here?When God openeth his treasurie,Psal. 66. 19, 20. wee must open our mouthesWhat is true thankfulnesse?〈◊〉 the saying, but the giuing ofMatt. 21. 30. Luke 18. 11. Gen. 27. 22. Where haue we the best patterne of prayer and praise?In that absolute, most holy forme ofMat. 6. 9. What do you obserue therein?The preface, and prayer itselfe.What are the words of the preface!Mat 3 17. Col. 1. 13. Gal. 4. 4. Ioh. 1. 12. Gal. 4, 5, 6. Ps. 115What do these words teach?To come to God onely, and to comePs. 103. 13. Ec. 4. 17 〈◊〉. 3. 5. 〈◊〉. 28VVhat say you of the prayer it selfe?It is in the seuerall petitions, or confirmation of them.What say you of the petitions?They are such as belong to Gods glory, or our owne necessities.What are they that belong to Gods glorie?They are such as concerne the aduancement of his glory, or VVhat petition concerneth the aduancement of his glorie?The first, which is: halowed be thyFirst PetVVhat doe you obserue therein?The meaning, and thing taught.What is the meaning?That God in his person, titles, works,〈◊〉 28. 8. 〈◊〉. 3. 14 Ps 68. 4. 6 Psal. 10What is the thing taught?That they pray wickedly, who say, halowed be thy name, and, yet are ordinarSo much for the Petition about the aduancement of Gods glory: what are they that concerne the meanesVVhat is the first of them?Thy kingdome come.What do you obserue therein?〈◊◊〉.The meaning, and thing taught.What is the meaning?That the kingdome of grace in thePs. 〈◊〉. 2. 1 Cor 15. 25. Rom 14. 17. Ioh. 14, What is the thing taught?That their prayers are sinnes whoPhil. 3. 18. 〈◊〉. 44. 16 Act. 13. 45. Luk.So much for the first of those petitions which concerne the meanes of Gods glorie: what is the seconWhat do you obserue therein?The meaning, and thing taught.Rom 12. 2. Deut. 〈◊〉. 20. Mat 21. 30 〈◊〉. What i•… the meaning?That the Will of GOD in his word may bee (not spoken of only or professed) but What is the thing taught?That they pray in sinne and againstEsay 58. 3, 13 2. Tim. 2. 26. Esay 29. 1So much for the Petitions that concerne Gods glory: what say you of those that concerne our owne necVVhat is that that concerneth the things of this li•…?The fourth next Petition, which is:4. PetitionWhat do you obserue therein?The meaning and thing taught.What is the meaning?Gen 3. 19 1. Tim. 5. 8 Ephes. 4. 28 〈◊〉. •…hes. 2. 9. & 2. Thes. 3. 8, 12 Pro. 3What is the thing taught?That they pray without faith and inNum. 11. 4. 6. Luke 12. 13 Math. 20. 11,So much for that petition, which concerneth the necessities of this life: what are they that concernWhat is the first of them?Forgiue vs our trespasses, seeing that5. Petition. euen we, &c.What do you obserue therein?The meaning and thing taught.What is the meaning?Psal. 32. 1, 2 Esay 38. 17 M•…. 7. 19. Psal. 103. 3. 1. Ioh. 2. 12. Colos. 2. 13What is the thing taught?That they call for vengeance by all their prayers, that take vpon them (papWhat is the second Petition concerning the necessities of the life to come?The next Petition, which What do you obserue therein?The meaning and thing taught.What is the meaning?1. Tim. 6. 9. Ioh. 13. 2. Psal. 19. 13. & 119. 133. Rō. 6. 12. 2. Tim. 4. 17, 1What is the thing taught?That they pray dangerously and sinfully,

who, praying against temptations,So much for the prayer it selfe: what say you of the confirmation therof?It is in the reason of the What are the words of the reason?For 〈◊〉 is the Kingdome, &c.What do you obserue therein?The meaning and thing taught.What is the meaning?Mat. 7. 25. & 16. 8. Psal. 89. 19. 1. Chr. 29. 12. 1. Chr. 29. 11 Luke 1. 37 PsaWhat is the thing taught?That they haue no assurance by theirLeuit. 10. 3 Rom. 1. 21 Luke 18. •…, 11So much for the reason of the Petitions, what say you of the seale?It is in the last word, Amen; or What do you obserue therein?The meaning and thing taught.What is the meaning?That wée 〈◊〉 pray with earnestnesse,Dan. 9. 19. Luk. 11. 8. 9. Psal. 84 11. Apo.VVhat is the thing taught?That they can haue no comfort in asking, who either pray not in faith and 
    _ An Examination before our comming to the Lords Table.
WHat doe you call the Sacrament of the Lords Supper?Our growing vp withEph. 4. 15, 16 1. 〈◊〉. 10. 16In comming to this Sacrament, what is to be considered by euery well prepared Communicant?The doctriWhat say you of the Doctrine?It is séens in the nature of the signs which are made Sacraments, or inVVhat say you of the nature of the signes?Their nature is to be seales of theMat. 26. 26, 28 body anWhere haue you the seale of Christs body?In the bread.Matth. 26. 26Where, of his bloud?In the Wine.Matth. 26. 27So much for the nature of the signes: what say you of their vses?They be such as concerne the Brea•…What is that concerneth the bread?It is that which is seene in the breaking and giuing, or in the reWhat doth the breaking of bread signifie?Isay 53. 5. 1. Cor. 11. 24The wounding and breaking of the What doth the giuing of it signifie?The giuing of Christ, the true bread,Iohn 6. 51 1. Cor. 11. 24 fWhat doth the receiuing of the bread signifie?The receiuing of Christ with theIohn 1. 12 Ephes. 3. 1Who are reprooued here?The Papists, who say and beleeueBellarm. Tom. 2. 〈◊〉. 〈◊〉. gen. de sacr. EuchWhat say you against this grosse opinion?That a true naturall body, such as

Christs is, cannot be iSo much for receiuing; what doth the eating of the bread signifie?That as bread doth nourish our temSo much for the vses of the bread; what be they of the wine?They bee séene in the pouring out, and gVVhat doth the pouring out of the wine signifie?The pouring of the •…oud out of hisMat. 26. 28 1. CoVVhat doth the giuing of the wine signifie?Our full nourishment in Christ offered,Iohn 6. 55 Psal. 1VVhat doth this teach?That the Papists did, and still doe,1. Cor. 11 25 with iniurious sacriledge, dSo much for giuing: what doth the receiuing of the Wine signifie?That possession is taken of whole1.VVhat doth the drinking of, the wine signifie?The applying of the comforts ofGalat. 6. 14 Phil. 3. 8So much of the doctrine of the Sacrament: what say you of our ends of comming to it?They be before, What is that which is before our comming?Our end before our comming is, toActs 8. 36 Iohn, 7. 37, 38VVhat bee the endes in our comming?Such as testifie gifts, or receits.What be our gifts?Such as we giue to Christ the 〈◊〉, or to the Church his members.VVhat giue you to Christ the Head?A heart well examined concerning1. Cor. 11. 28 〈◊〉 c 15 21 Mat. 8.VV•…at els?An •…mble oblation of our selues,Rom. 12. 1 soules and bodies to him, with thanksg•… at o〈◊〉 in standeth the hearts exa•…?1 〈◊〉. 11. 〈◊〉 2. 〈◊〉. 〈◊〉. 5 〈◊〉 22. 12 〈◊〉. 〈◊〉. 2 〈◊〉. 1. 21 HebVVhat call you the examination of your knowledge?Whether I haue a competent measure1. Cor. 11. 29 thVVhat of your faith?Whether I bee in the faith; beleeuing2. Cor. 13 5 Math. 8. 13•…hat t•…e death ofVVhat of your loue?Whether I bee in charity with allMat. 5. 44 Rom. 12. 18 men, euen with my very enVVhat of your repentance?Psal. 32. 5, 6. & 51. 3, 4, 5 Math. 3. 8Whether I acknowledge my sinnes witVVhat of your thankfulnesse?Psal. 116. 12 Luke 1. 74, 75 1. Pet. 2. 9Whether I be ready to expresse VVhat of the workes of your particular calling?Whether with some greater measureLuke 3. 13, 14 〈◊〉. So much for that which you giue to Christ the Head, what giue you to the Church his members?A fellowWhat doth this teach?That they that are negligent or prophane commers to the Lords Table, do detractSo much for our giftes: what doe we receiue at the Lords Table?That, which we receiue there, concernWhat is that, that concerneth our selues alone?The strengthening of our faith and1. Cor. 11. 24. & 1How is our faith strengthened, and 〈◊〉•…olpen by it?〈◊〉•…ing that in the Sacrament,1. Cor. 11. 26 〈◊So much 〈◊〉 that which concerneth our selue•… alone: what is that that concerneth our selues with otHow do we receiue our growing vp 〈◊〉 Christ?We receiue it with Christ by spiritual1. Cor. 10. 3, 4 eHow do we receiue our communion with our brethren?By 〈◊〉 our mutuall agréement,1. Cor. 10. 17 in as How else?By feeding all of the same foode1. Cor. 10. 4. & 12, 13. bodily and spiritually, and by draSo much for our examination before the Sacrament.〈◊〉. 23. 1.〈◊◊◊◊〉 with a Ruler▪〈◊◊◊◊◊◊〉 thee.
    _ A short Direction for spending of time well.
HOw doe you diuide the daies of mans life?Into the daies of labour, and daves of holinesse.VVhat say you of the daies of labor?These concerne the works of our calling, or workes of helpe vntoWhat be the works of our calling?The workes of that trade of life, in1. 〈◊◊〉. 〈◊〉. 〈◊◊〉. 4. 1 which What must a man do in these?By offering them to God, he must〈1 paragraph〉 walke in them neither slacThen, euery one must haue some speciall call•…g & trade of life to liue in?〈◊◊〉, or hée is no sound So much for the workes of our callings: what say you of the workes of helpe vnto them?They concerne What must we doe in the morning before our worke?Prayse God for his mercy the nightPsal. 59. 16. & 8How shall we prayse God?〈◊〉. 5. 20 Colos. 1. 10.By giuing him thanks, and by shewing our thankfulnesHow is our thankfulnesse shewed?Inwardly, or outwardly.How inwardly?By pleasing God in our vnderstanding,Pro. 23. 26 Col. 1. 10. thoughts, desire, affectioHow outwardly?By pleasing him in our words and deeds.How in our words?Col. 4. 6. 〈◊〉. 4. 29.When they be gracious alway.VVhat things hurt this grace of speech?Lying, swearing, brawling, •…lthie

speaking, foolish talkingHow in our deedes?These are in the duties of our generallRom. 12. 4 callings, as we are Christians: What are our duties as we be Christians?Acts 24. 〈◊〉These concerne God or man.What are they that concerne God?They are in the foure CommaundementsTit. 2. 12 of the first Table, cWhat are they that concerne man?They concerne our selues, or ourTit. 2. 12 neighbour.What is that that concerneth our selues?Sobriety, which is inward; andRom. 12. 13. teacheth vs not tWhat must our apparell be?Such as becommeth those that professe1. Tim. 2. 〈◊〉
the feare of God.What call you sobriety in dyet?That grace of temperance that consi•…ethLuke 〈◊〉. 34 Rom. 13. 13 1. TWhat sobriety is that, which you call sobriety of sense, and the outward members?Sobriety of sense iSo much for the generall d•…ety that concerneth our selues, called sobrietie: what is that that concSo much for our general duties, as we be Christians; what say you of our particular duties, or dutieWhat is the Husbands dutie?To dwel with his wife, as a man of knowledge, by instructing her, and by1What is the wiues dutie?Gen. 2. 18 1. Pet. 3. 2 Ephes. 5. 22, 24To helpe her husband in the duties oWhat be the Parents duties?They concerne the father and niether iointly, or by themselues.What be their ioint duties to their children?In their tender yeeres they must instructPro. 22. 6 EphSo much for the Parents ioint duties: what is the Fathers more speciall duty?To prouide for his chilWhat is the Mothers speciall duty?To nurse vp her children, if GodGen. 21. 7. 1. Tim. 5. 10. haue giWhat be the childrens duties?They be such as they owe to their Parents, or one to another.What duties doe they owe to their Parents?They owe them reuerence in their•…euit. 19. 3. •…phes. 6 1What duties do they owe one to another?Psalme 133. 1 Gen. 45. 24.To loue as brethren, & not to fall VVhat duties do Masters owe?They concerne Religion; and so they must help them to God by their instrVVhat duties do seruants owe?In singlenesse of heart, and all goodEphes. 6. 6. Tit. 2. 9, 14, 1. PetSo much for our thankfulnes to God, expressed in our words and deeds, and for our duties the morningVVhat must we do between our work?It concerneth our refreshings, or recreation.VVhat must we do at our refreshings?Pray before meat for Gods blessing, giue thanks, after, for GodsVVhat must we obserue in our recreation?That our company be good, and•…phes. 5 7. 11. 〈◊〉 4. 8 ThessWhen be our sports of good report?When they be lawfull for the nature•…om. 14. 16. Co•…. 6. 12. 〈◊〉,So much for the duties as are betweene our worke: what must we doe after it?Examine our selues, as vHow shall wee by such preparation make our sleepe comfortable?By committing our selues to God,1. PetBut some go to bed without praier?Such sleep in Satans lap, & haue him for their keeper: who (therefVVhat reason can you giue to proue the necessity of prayer, before wee goe to rest?That night (for oVVhat do you conclude of this?That those Masters are cruel to their seruants, who suffer them to go So much for the daies of labour: what say you of the daies of holinesse?On Gods Sabbaths, we must (fHow must we keepe them holy?By doing as little worldly work assa. 58. 13. 〈◊〉 48. 〈◊〉. •…eut. 5. 12.In doing of Gods worke, what is to be considered?That we do the works that sanctiūe the Sabbath, anVVhat works are required to the •…ifying of the Sabbath?To preuent or defer, & by rising early〈◊〉 16VVhat other works are required?It is required further, before wee come to the assemblie, that wee prVVhat is (lastly) required?Ps. 92. 5. Rom. 19, 20. Ps. 9, 1. Acts 17. 11. Ios. 1. 8. Cant. 8. 13 Ps.So much for the works to be done: what are the vnfruitfull workes to be auoided?The spending of the 
#####Back#####

1. A briefe rehearsall of the tenne Commandements for the •…se of the 〈◊〉.

**Types of content**

  * There are 10 **verse** lines!
  * Oh, Mr. Jourdain, there is **prose** in there!

There are 654 **ommitted** fragments! 
 @__reason__ (654) : illegible (620), duplicate (34)  •  @__resp__ (620) : #APEX (620)  •  @__extent__ (654) : 1 word (318), 1+ letters (259), 3 words (6), 2 words (29), 5 words (2), 4 words (2), 1 line (1), 6 words (1), 1 paragraph (2), 1 page (34)

**Character listing**


|Text|string(s)|codepoint(s)|
|---|---|---|
|Latin-1 Supplement|é|233|
|Combining             Diacritical Marks|̄|772|
|General Punctuation|•…|8226 8230|
|Geometric Shapes|◊▪|9674 9642|
|CJKSymbolsandPunctuation|〈〉|12296 12297|

##Tag Usage Summary##

###Header Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__author__|3||
|2.|__availability__|1||
|3.|__biblFull__|1||
|4.|__change__|5||
|5.|__date__|8| @__when__ (1) : 2003-01 (1)|
|6.|__edition__|2||
|7.|__editionStmt__|2||
|8.|__editorialDecl__|1||
|9.|__extent__|2||
|10.|__idno__|6| @__type__ (6) : DLPS (1), STC (2), EEBO-CITATION (1), PROQUEST (1), VID (1)|
|11.|__keywords__|1| @__scheme__ (1) : http://authorities.loc.gov/ (1)|
|12.|__label__|5||
|13.|__langUsage__|1||
|14.|__language__|1| @__ident__ (1) : eng (1)|
|15.|__listPrefixDef__|1||
|16.|__note__|6||
|17.|__notesStmt__|2||
|18.|__p__|11||
|19.|__prefixDef__|2| @__ident__ (2) : tcp (1), char (1)  •  @__matchPattern__ (2) : ([0-9\-]+):([0-9IVX]+) (1), (.+) (1)  •  @__replacementPattern__ (2) : http://eebo.chadwyck.com/downloadtiff?vid=$1&page=$2 (1), https://raw.githubusercontent.com/textcreationpartnership/Texts/master/tcpchars.xml#$1 (1)|
|20.|__projectDesc__|1||
|21.|__pubPlace__|2||
|22.|__publicationStmt__|2||
|23.|__publisher__|2||
|24.|__ref__|2| @__target__ (2) : https://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/ (1), http://www.textcreationpartnership.org/docs/. (1)|
|25.|__seriesStmt__|1||
|26.|__sourceDesc__|1||
|27.|__term__|3||
|28.|__textClass__|1||
|29.|__title__|3||
|30.|__titleStmt__|2||


###Text Tag Usage###

|No|element name|occ|attributes|
|---|---|---|---|
|1.|__bibl__|4||
|2.|__closer__|6||
|3.|__desc__|654||
|4.|__div__|371| @__type__ (371) : title_page (1), to_the_reader (1), text (2), part (5), section (362)|
|5.|__epigraph__|4||
|6.|__g__|394| @__ref__ (394) : char:EOLhyphen (350), char:punc (27), char:cmbAbbrStroke (17)|
|7.|__gap__|654| @__reason__ (654) : illegible (620), duplicate (34)  •  @__resp__ (620) : #APEX (620)  •  @__extent__ (654) : 1 word (318), 1+ letters (259), 3 words (6), 2 words (29), 5 words (2), 4 words (2), 1 line (1), 6 words (1), 1 paragraph (2), 1 page (34)|
|8.|__head__|7||
|9.|__hi__|487| @__rend__ (5) : sup (5)|
|10.|__l__|10||
|11.|__lg__|1||
|12.|__note__|257| @__place__ (257) : margin (257)  •  @__n__ (17) : a (6), b (5), c (4), d (2)|
|13.|__p__|732||
|14.|__pb__|114| @__facs__ (114) : tcp:21632:1 (1), tcp:21632:2 (2), tcp:21632:3 (2), tcp:21632:4 (2), tcp:21632:5 (2), tcp:21632:6 (2), tcp:21632:7 (2), tcp:21632:8 (2), tcp:21632:9 (2), tcp:21632:10 (2), tcp:21632:11 (2), tcp:21632:12 (2), tcp:21632:13 (2), tcp:21632:14 (2), tcp:21632:15 (2), tcp:21632:16 (2), tcp:21632:17 (2), tcp:21632:18 (2), tcp:21632:19 (2), tcp:21632:20 (2), tcp:21632:21 (2), tcp:21632:22 (2), tcp:21632:23 (2), tcp:21632:24 (2), tcp:21632:25 (2), tcp:21632:26 (2), tcp:21632:27 (2), tcp:21632:28 (2), tcp:21632:29 (2), tcp:21632:30 (2), tcp:21632:31 (2), tcp:21632:32 (2), tcp:21632:33 (2), tcp:21632:34 (2), tcp:21632:35 (2), tcp:21632:36 (2), tcp:21632:37 (2), tcp:21632:38 (2), tcp:21632:39 (2), tcp:21632:40 (2), tcp:21632:41 (1), tcp:21632:42 (2), tcp:21632:43 (2), tcp:21632:44 (2), tcp:21632:45 (2), tcp:21632:46 (2), tcp:21632:47 (2), tcp:21632:48 (2), tcp:21632:49 (2), tcp:21632:50 (2), tcp:21632:51 (2), tcp:21632:52 (2), tcp:21632:53 (2), tcp:21632:54 (2), tcp:21632:55 (2), tcp:21632:56 (2), tcp:21632:57 (2), tcp:21632:58 (2)  •  @__rendition__ (1) : simple:additions (1)|
|15.|__q__|4||
|16.|__seg__|2| @__rend__ (2) : decorInit (2)|
|17.|__signed__|1||
|18.|__trailer__|1||
